 Risk Modeling
How can banks better understand customers and markets?

The Summary
A large bank took separate data warehouses from multiple departments and combined them
into a single global repository in Hadoop for analysis. The bank used the Hadoop cluster to
construct a new and more accurate score of the risk in its customer portfolios. The more
accurate score allowed the bank to manage its exposure better and to offer each customer
better products and advice. Hadoop increased revenue and improved customer satisfaction.

The Challenge

A very large bank with several consumer lines of business needed to analyze customer
activity across multiple products to predict credit risk with greater accuracy.
Over the years, the bank had acquired a number of regional banks. Each of those banks
had a checking and savings business, a home mortgage business, credit card offerings, and
other financial products. Those applications generally ran in separate silos—each used its
own database and application software. As a result, over the years the bank had built up a
large number of independent systems that could not share data easily.

With the economic downturn of 2008, the bank had significant exposure in its mortgage
business to defaults by its borrowers. Understanding that risk required the bank to build a
comprehensive picture of its customers. A customer whose direct deposits to checking had
stopped, and who was buying more on credit cards, was likely to have lost a job recently.
That customer was at higher risk of default on outstanding loans as a result.

The Solution

The bank set up a single Hadoop cluster containing more than a petabyte of data collected
from multiple enterprise data warehouses. With all of the information in one place, the bank
added new sources of data, including customer call center recordings, chat sessions, emails
to the customer service desk, and others. Pattern matching techniques recognize the same
customer across the different sources, even when there were some discrepancies in the
identifying information stored. The bank applied techniques like text processing, sentiment
analysis, graph creation, and automatic pattern matching to combine, digest, and analyze
the data.

The result of this analysis is a very clear picture of a customer’s financial situation, this risk
of default or late payment, and his satisfaction with the bank and its services. The bank has
demonstrated not just a reduction of cost from the existing system, but improved revenue
from better risk management and customer retention.

While this application was specific to retail banking services, the techniques described—
the collection and combination of structured and complex data from multiple silos, and a
powerful tool of analytics that combine the data and look for patterns – apply broadly. A
company with several lines of business often has only a fragmentary, incomplete picture
of its customers, and can improve revenues and customer satisfaction by creating a single
global view from those pieces.
